add C++ language support documentation (#3512)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/reference/c++_support.rst

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter describes the C++ support of the HIP ecosystem
  ROCm software.
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, C++

*******************************************************************************
C++ support
*******************************************************************************

.. _language_introduction:
Introduction
===============================================================================

The main way to harness the power of the ROCm platform is through the usage C++ and HIP
code. This code is then compiled with a ``clang`` or ``clang++`` compiler. The official

> versions support the HIP platform, but for the most up to date feature set use the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
versions support the HIP platform, but for the most up-to-date feature set use the
```

which is available for all threads in a block. ``__managed__`` is also used on global
variables. A managed variable is emitted as an undefined global symbol in the device
binary and is registered by ``__hipRegisterManagedVariable`` in init functions. The HIP
runtime allocates managed memory and uses it to define the symbol when loading the device
binary. A managed variable can be accessed in both device and host code. It is important
to know where each variable is because they will be only available in certain places.
Generally variables allocated in the host memory will not be available from device code
and variables allocated in the device memory will not be available from host code. This
can be an issue mostly with pointers in host memory, which are pointing to device memory.
Dereferencing these will cause a segmentation fault.

Exception handling
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An important difference between the host and device code is exception handling. In device
code it is not available, error handling needs to be done with return codes. This is

> because of the hardware architecture does not allow for this kind o control flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because of the hardware architecture does not allow for this kind of control flow.
```

.. _language_introduction:
Introduction
===============================================================================

The main way to harness the power of the ROCm platform is through the usage C++ and HIP
code. This code is then compiled with a ``clang`` or ``clang++`` compiler. The official
versions support the HIP platform, but for the most up-to-date feature set use the
``amdclang`` or ``amdclang++`` installed with your ROCm installation.

The source code will be processed based on the ``C++03``, ``C++11``, ``C++14``, ``C++17``
or ``C++20`` standards, but supports HIP specific extensions and is subject to certain
restrictions. The largest restriction is the lack of support of the standard library.
This is mostly because the SIMD nature of the HIP device makes most of the standard
library implementations not performant or useful. The important operations are
implemented in HIP specific libraries like rocPRIM, rocThrust and hipCUB.

.. _language_modern_c++_support:
Modern C++ support
===============================================================================

The C++11 and later standards had huge additions to C++ making it a truly modern

> language. In this section we'll describe which of these features HIP supports.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
language. In this section, we'll describe which of these features HIP supports.
```

C++11 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The C++11 standard introduced a myriad of new features to the language. These features
are supported in HIP device code, with some notable omissions. The biggest of which is
the lack of concurrency support on the device. This is because the HIP device concurrency
model is fundamentally different compared to the C++ model, which is used on the host
side. E.G: it doesn't make sense to start a new thread on the device.

> There are some restrictions and clarifications for certain features. For example some new

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are some restrictions and clarifications for certain features. For example, some new
```

features were like functions using ``initializer lists``, ``std::move`` and
``std::forward`` or functions with ``constexpr`` qualifier are implicitly considered to

> have ``__host__`` and ``__device__`` execution space specifier. Also ``constexpr``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
have ``__host__`` and ``__device__`` execution space specifier. Also, ``constexpr``
```

variables that are static member variables or namespace scoped can be used from both host

> and device, but only for value access. Dereferencing a static constexpr on a different

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and device, but only for value access. Dereferencing a static ``constexpr`` on a different
```

execution space than specified will cause an error.

> Lambdas work but there are some extensions and restrictions on their usage. To learn more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lambdas work, but there are some extensions and restrictions on their usage. To learn more
```

> about them read the `extended lambdas`_ sections.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
about them, read the `extended lambdas`_ sections.
```

C++14 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The C++14 language features are supported, except for the updates to the memory model.

C++17 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All C++17 language features are supported.

C++20 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All C++20 language features are supported, but extensions and restrictions apply. C++20
introduced features that change programs foundationally with coroutines and modules, but

> unfortunately these aren't supported by HIP. On the other hand ``consteval`` functions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
unfortunately these aren't supported by HIP. On the other hand, ``consteval`` functions
```

can be called from host and device, even if it is specified for host use only. 

> The three way comparison operator (also known as spaceship operator ``<=>``) works in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The three-way comparison operator (also known as spaceship operator ``<=>``) works in
```

both host and device code.

.. _language_restrictions:
Extensions and Restrictions
===============================================================================

Besides the above mentioned deviations from the standard, there are more general
extensions and restrictions to consider. 

> __global__ functions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``__global__`` functions
```

> -------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer 2: Add new line after heading.

Functions that work as an entry point for device execution are called kernels and are
specified with the ``__global__`` qualifier. Calling these functions happen with the
triple chevron operator: ``<<< >>>``. Kernel functions return type must be ``void``, they
can't be ``constexpr``, can't have a parameter of type ``std::initializer_list`` or
``va_list``, can't have a parameter of rvalue reference type. Kernels can have variadic

> template parameters, but only one pack and it must be the last in the template parameter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
template parameters, but only one pack, and it must be the last in the template parameter
```

list. 

Device Space Memory Specifiers
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> To specify whether a variable is allocated in host or device memory HIP has qualifiers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To specify whether a variable is allocated in host or device memory, HIP has qualifiers
```

called device space memory specifiers. These are ``__device__``, ``__shared__``,
``__managed__`` and ``__constant__``. These are meant to specify what memory is allocated
for a variable. ``__device__`` and ``__constant__`` specifier are used for static
variables and they will be allocated on the HIP devices global memory, with the only
difference that the ``__constant__`` variables can't be changed from the device code.
``__shared__`` is used in device code, to allocate the variable on the shared memory,
which is available for all threads in a block. ``__managed__`` is also used on global
variables. A managed variable is emitted as an undefined global symbol in the device
binary and is registered by ``__hipRegisterManagedVariable`` in init functions. The HIP
runtime allocates managed memory and uses it to define the symbol when loading the device
binary. A managed variable can be accessed in both device and host code. It is important
to know where each variable is because they will be only available in certain places.

> Generally variables allocated in the host memory will not be available from device code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generally, variables allocated in the host memory will not be available from device code
```

and variables allocated in the device memory will not be available from host code. This
can be an issue mostly with pointers in host memory, which are pointing to device memory.
Dereferencing these will cause a segmentation fault.

Exception handling
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An important difference between the host and device code is exception handling. In device
code it is not available, error handling needs to be done with return codes. This is
because of the hardware architecture does not allow for this kind of control flow.

Kernel parameters
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are some restrictions on kernel function parameters. They cannot be passed by

> reference, as these functions run on the device, but are called from the host. Also

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
reference, as these functions run on the device, but are called from the host. Also,
```

variable number of arguments is not allowed.

Classes
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Classes work on both host and device side, but there are some constraints. ``Static``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Classes work on both host and device side, but there are some constraints. ``static``
```

> data members need to be ``const`` qualified and ``static`` member functions can't be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
data members need to be ``const`` qualified, and ``static`` member functions can't be
```

``__global__``. ``Virtual`` member functions work, but it's undefined behaviour to call a
virtual function from the host, when the object was created on the device, or the
other way around. This also means, that you can't pass an object with virtual functions
as a parameter to a kernel.

Polymorphic Function Wrappers
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Since C++11 the standard library has a polymorphic function wrapper ``std::function``.
This has an equivalent in CUDA called ``nvstd::function`` to work on CUDA enabled

> devices. Unfortunately HIP doesn't have it's own version currently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
devices. Unfortunately, HIP doesn't have its own version currently.
```

Extended Lambdas
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lambdas are a powerful tool in modern C++ and are supported by the HIP ecosystem. By

> default the lambda will work as you expect, but keep in mind that they will inherit the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
default, the lambda will work as you expect, but keep in mind that they will inherit the
```

> execution space specification from the surrounding context. For example in a device

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
execution space specification from the surrounding context. For example, in a device
```

the lambda can only be called from other device functions. This also means that lambdas
can't be used as template argument for kernels unless they are defined in a device

> function or a kernel. To help develop versatile software HIP has an extension making

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
function or a kernel. To help develop versatile software, HIP has an extension making
```

lambdas even more powerful. They can have ``__host__`` or ``__device__`` qualifiers. This
way developers can define lambdas in host code, that can run on the device side as well,
and used as template parameter for ``__global__`` functions.

Inline namespaces
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Inline namespaces are supported, but with a few exception. The following entities can't

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inline namespaces are supported, but with a few exceptions. The following entities can't
```

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter describes the C++ support of the HIP ecosystem
  ROCm software.
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, C++

*******************************************************************************

> C++ support

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
C++ language support
```

*******************************************************************************

.. _language_introduction:
Introduction
===============================================================================

The main way to harness the power of the ROCm platform is through the usage C++ and HIP
code. This code is then compiled with a ``clang`` or ``clang++`` compiler. The official
versions support the HIP platform, but for the most up-to-date feature set use the

> ``amdclang`` or ``amdclang++`` installed with your ROCm installation.

Reviewer 4: The ROCm platform enables the power of combined C++ and HIP code. This code is compiled with a ``clang`` or ``clang++`` compiler. The official compilers support the HIP platform, but for the most up-to-date feature set, use the ``amdclang`` or ``amdclang+``+ components included in the ROCm installation.

The source code will be processed based on the ``C++03``, ``C++11``, ``C++14``, ``C++17``
or ``C++20`` standards, but supports HIP specific extensions and is subject to certain
restrictions. The largest restriction is the lack of support of the standard library.
This is mostly because the SIMD nature of the HIP device makes most of the standard
library implementations not performant or useful. The important operations are

> implemented in HIP specific libraries like rocPRIM, rocThrust and hipCUB.

Reviewer 4: The source code is compiled according to the ``C++03``, ``C++11``, ``C++14``, ``C++17``, and ``C++20`` standards, along with HIP-specific extensions, but is subject to restrictions. The key restriction is the lack of standard library support. This is due to the Single Instruction/Multiple Data (SIMD) nature of the HIP device, which makes most of the standard library implementations not performant or useful. However, essential operations are implemented in HIP-specific libraries such as rocPRIM, rocThrust, and hipCUB.

Reviewer 4: -- Add hyperlinks to the libraries.
-- Do you mean "standard library implementations" (i.e GNU C++) or "standard library features" (i.e iostream)?

Author: It is both. Some standard library features are not used, because in a GPU context it makes no sense and some are not used, because the implementation is optimized for CPU and wouldn't be efficient.

Author: in conclusion: I think implementation is the proper word to use there

Reviewer 4: Fair enough, let's use implementation.

.. _language_modern_c++_support:
Modern C++ support
===============================================================================

> The C++11 and later standards had huge additions to C++ making it a truly modern

Reviewer 4: C++ is considered a modern programming language as of C++11. This section describes how HIP supports these new C++ features.

language. In this section, we'll describe which of these features HIP supports.

C++11 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The C++11 standard introduced a myriad of new features to the language. These features
are supported in HIP device code, with some notable omissions. The biggest of which is
the lack of concurrency support on the device. This is because the HIP device concurrency
model is fundamentally different compared to the C++ model, which is used on the host

> side. E.G: it doesn't make sense to start a new thread on the device.

Reviewer 4: The C++11 standard introduced many new features. These features are supported in HIP device code, with some notable omissions. The most significant is the lack of concurrency support on the device. This is because the HIP device concurrency model fundamentally differs from the C++ model used on the host side. For example, it is not necessary to start a new thread on the device.

There are some restrictions and clarifications for certain features. For example, some
new features were like functions using ``initializer lists``, ``std::move`` and
``std::forward`` or functions with ``constexpr`` qualifier are implicitly considered to
have ``__host__`` and ``__device__`` execution space specifier. Also, ``constexpr``
variables that are static member variables or namespace scoped can be used from both host
and device, but only for value access. Dereferencing a static ``constexpr`` on a different

> execution space than specified will cause an error.

Reviewer 4: Certain features have restrictions and clarifications. For example, any functions using the ``constexpr`` qualifier or the new ``initializer lists``, ``std::move`` or ``std::forward`` features are implicitly considered to have the ``__host__`` and ``__device__`` execution space specifier.  Also, ``constexpr`` variables that are static members or namespace scoped can be used from both host and device, but only for read access. Dereferencing a static ``constexpr`` outside its specified execution space causes an error.

Lambdas work, but there are some extensions and restrictions on their usage. To learn

> more about them, read the `extended lambdas`_ sections.

Reviewer 4: Lambdas are supported, but there are some extensions and restrictions on their usage. For more information, see the [Extended lambdas](https://advanced-micro-devices-demo--3512.com.readthedocs.build/projects/HIP/en/3512/reference/c%2B%2B_support.html#extended-lambdas) section below.

C++14 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The C++14 language features are supported, except for the updates to the memory model.

C++17 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All C++17 language features are supported.

C++20 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All C++20 language features are supported, but extensions and restrictions apply. C++20
introduced features that change programs foundationally with coroutines and modules, but
unfortunately these aren't supported by HIP. On the other hand, ``consteval`` functions

> can be called from host and device, even if it is specified for host use only. 

Reviewer 4: All C++20 language features are supported, but extensions and restrictions apply. C++20 introduced coroutines and modules, which fundamentally change how programs are written. HIP doesn’t support these features. However, ``consteval`` functions can be called from host and device, even if specified for host use only.

The three-way comparison operator (also known as spaceship operator ``<=>``) works in

> both host and device code.

Reviewer 4: The three-way comparison operator (spaceship operator ``<=>``) works with host and device code

.. _language_restrictions:

> Extensions and Restrictions

Reviewer 4: Extensions and restrictions

===============================================================================

Besides the above mentioned deviations from the standard, there are more general

> extensions and restrictions to consider. 

Reviewer 4: In addition to the deviations from the standard, there are some general extensions and restrictions to consider.

> ``__global__`` functions

Reviewer 4: Global functions

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Functions that work as an entry point for device execution are called kernels and are
specified with the ``__global__`` qualifier. Calling these functions happen with the
triple chevron operator: ``<<< >>>``. Kernel functions return type must be ``void``, they
can't be ``constexpr``, can't have a parameter of type ``std::initializer_list`` or
``va_list``, can't have a parameter of rvalue reference type. Kernels can have variadic
template parameters, but only one pack, and it must be the last in the template parameter

> list. 

Reviewer 4: Functions that serve as an entry point for device execution are called kernels and are specified with the ``__global__`` qualifier. To call a kernel function, use the triple chevron operator: ``<<< >>>``. Kernel functions must have a ``void`` return type. These functions can’t:

•	have a ``constexpr`` specifier
•	have a parameter of type ``std::initializer_list`` or ``va_list``
•	use an rvalue reference as a parameter. 

Kernels can have variadic template parameters, but they can only have one parameter pack, which must be the last item in the template parameter list.

> Device Space Memory Specifiers

Reviewer 4: Device space memory specifiers

for a variable. ``__device__`` and ``__constant__`` specifier are used for static
variables and they will be allocated on the HIP devices global memory, with the only
difference that the ``__constant__`` variables can't be changed from the device code.
``__shared__`` is used in device code, to allocate the variable on the shared memory,
which is available for all threads in a block. ``__managed__`` is also used on global
variables. A managed variable is emitted as an undefined global symbol in the device
binary and is registered by ``__hipRegisterManagedVariable`` in init functions. The HIP
runtime allocates managed memory and uses it to define the symbol when loading the device
binary. A managed variable can be accessed in both device and host code. It is important
to know where each variable is because they will be only available in certain places.
Generally, variables allocated in the host memory will not be available from device code
and variables allocated in the device memory will not be available from host code. This
can be an issue mostly with pointers in host memory, which are pointing to device memory.

> Dereferencing these will cause a segmentation fault.

Reviewer 4: HIP includes device space memory specifiers to indicate whether a variable is allocated in host or device memory and how its memory should be allocated. HIP supports the `` __device__``, ``__shared__``, ``__managed__`` and ``__constant__`` specifiers. 

The ``__device__`` and ``__constant__`` specifiers define static variables, which are allocated within global memory on the HIP devices. The only difference is that ``__constant__`` variables can’t be changed after allocation. The ``__shared__`` specifier allocates the variable within shared memory, which is available for all threads in a block.

The ``__managed__`` variable specifier is used to create global variables that are initially undefined and unaddressed within the global symbol table. The HIP runtime allocates managed memory and defines the symbol when it loads the device binary. A managed variable can be accessed in both device and host code. To register managed variables, use ``__hipRegisterManagedVariable`` in an init function.

It’s important to know where a variable is stored because it is only available from certain locations. Generally, variables allocated in the host memory are not accessible from the device code, while variables allocated in the device memory are not accessible from the host code. Dereferencing a pointer to device memory on the host results in a segmentation fault.

Reviewer 4: If init is the name of a function, then use inline code formatting. Otherwise, spell it out as initialization. If you mean a constructor, change this to object constructor.

Exception handling
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An important difference between the host and device code is exception handling. In device
code it is not available, error handling needs to be done with return codes. This is

> because of the hardware architecture does not allow for this kind of control flow.

Reviewer 4: An important difference between the host and device code is exception handling. In device code, this control flow is not available due to the hardware architecture. The device code must use return codes to handle errors.

Kernel parameters
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are some restrictions on kernel function parameters. They cannot be passed by
reference, as these functions run on the device, but are called from the host. Also,

> variable number of arguments is not allowed.

Reviewer 4: There are some restrictions on kernel function parameters. They cannot be passed by reference, because these functions are called from the host but run on the device. Also, a variable number of arguments is not allowed.

Classes
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Classes work on both host and device side, but there are some constraints. ``static``
data members need to be ``const`` qualified, and ``static`` member functions can't be
``__global__``. ``Virtual`` member functions work, but it's undefined behaviour to call a
virtual function from the host, when the object was created on the device, or the
other way around. This also means, that you can't pass an object with virtual functions

> as a parameter to a kernel.

Reviewer 4: Classes work on both the host and device side, but there are some constraints. The static data members need to be ``const`` qualified, and ``static`` member functions can’t be ``__global__``. ``Virtual`` member functions work, but a virtual function must not be called from the host if the parent object was created on the device, or the other way around, because this behavior is undefined. This also means you can’t pass an object with virtual functions as a parameter to a kernel.

> Polymorphic Function Wrappers

Reviewer 4: Polymorphic function wrappers

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Since C++11 the standard library has a polymorphic function wrapper ``std::function``.
This has an equivalent in CUDA called ``nvstd::function`` to work on CUDA enabled

> devices. Unfortunately, HIP doesn't have its own version currently.

Reviewer 4: HIP doesn’t support the polymorphic function wrapper ``std::function``, which was introduced in C++11. The equivalent capability in CUDA is ``nvstd::function``, which works on CUDA-enabled devices.

Reviewer 4: Do we need to include low-level function specifics about CUDA?

Author: I guess we don't really need it. I was asked to mention polymorphic function wrapper, but it's enough to say, that it's not supported

> Extended Lambdas

Reviewer 4: Extended lambdas

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lambdas are a powerful tool in modern C++ and are supported by the HIP ecosystem. By
default, the lambda will work as you expect, but keep in mind that they will inherit the
execution space specification from the surrounding context. For example, in a device
the lambda can only be called from other device functions. This also means that lambdas
can't be used as template argument for kernels unless they are defined in a device
function or a kernel. To help develop versatile software, HIP has an extension making
lambdas even more powerful. They can have ``__host__`` or ``__device__`` qualifiers. This
way developers can define lambdas in host code, that can run on the device side as well,

> and used as template parameter for ``__global__`` functions.

Reviewer 4: HIP supports Lambdas, which by default work as expected.

Lambdas inherit the execution space specification from the surrounding context. For example, in a device, the lambda can only be called from other device functions. This also means that lambdas can’t be used as a template argument for kernels unless they are defined in a device function or a kernel.

To help develop versatile software, HIP supports an extension that makes lambdas even more powerful. They can have ``__host__`` or ``__device__`` qualifiers. Developers can use this feature to define lambdas in host code that can run on the device side and be used as a template parameter for ``__global__`` functions.

results in a segmentation fault. Accessing device variables in host code should be done
through kernel execution or HIP functions like ``hipMemCpyToSymbol``.

Exception handling
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An important difference between the host and device code is exception handling. In device
code, this control flow isn't available due to the hardware architecture. The device
code must use return codes to handle errors.

Kernel parameters
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are some restrictions on kernel function parameters. They cannot be passed by
reference, because these functions are called from the host but run on the device. Also,
a variable number of arguments is not allowed.

Classes
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Classes work on both the host and device side, but there are some constraints. The
``static`` member functions can't be ``__global__``. ``Virtual`` member functions work,
but a ``virtual`` function must not be called from the host if the parent object was

> created on the device, or the other way around, because this behavior is undefined.

Reviewer 5: Is there not still a constraint that `__device__` global variables must have trivial constructors?

Reviewer 2: @b-sumner we confirmed and added the note to the documentation:

https://github.com/ROCm/HIP/pull/3512/commits/61e8f6bb739f75c90d439fc3445025d6cff982fe

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter describes the C++ support of the HIP ecosystem
  ROCm software.
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, C++

*******************************************************************************
C++ language support
*******************************************************************************

The ROCm platform enables the power of combined C++ and HIP (Heterogeneous-computing
Interface for Portability) code. This code is compiled with a ``clang`` or ``clang++``
compiler. The official compilers support the HIP platform, but for the most up-to-date

> feature set, use the ``amdclang`` or ``amdclang++`` components included in the ROCm

Reviewer 6: amdclang and amdclang++ are simple wrapper programs which launches clang or clang++ under the same directory. They are so named to differentiate from clang or clang++ coming with the system default packages.

installation.

The source code is compiled according to the ``C++03``, ``C++11``, ``C++14``, ``C++17``,
and ``C++20`` standards, along with HIP-specific extensions, but is subject to
restrictions. The key restriction is the lack of standard library support. This is due to

> the HIP device's Single Instruction/Multiple Data (SIMD) nature, which makes most of the

Reviewer 6: C++ standard libraries are supported for HIP host code. constexpr functions of C++ standard libraries are supported for HIP device code. Most functionality of C++ standard libraries are not supported for HIP device code since non-constexpr C++ functions are host functions, which cannot be called by device functions or kernels in HIP.

standard library implementations not performant or useful. However, essential operations
are implemented in HIP-specific libraries such as `rocPRIM
<https://github.com/ROCm/rocprim>`_, `rocThrust <https://github.com/ROCm/rocthrust/>`_,
and `hipCUB <https://github.com/ROCm/hipcub/>`_.

.. _language_modern_c++_support:
Modern C++ support
===============================================================================

C++ is considered a modern programming language as of C++11. This section describes how
HIP supports these new C++ features.

C++11 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The C++11 standard introduced many new features. These features are supported in HIP
device code, with some notable omissions. The most significant is the lack of concurrency

> support on the device. This is because the HIP device concurrency model fundamentally

Reviewer 6: It is important to note that although C++11 language features are supported by HIP for both host and device code, C++11 standard library features are mostly supported for host code only. The implementation of the C++11 standard library does not consider being used by HIP device code. Even though constexpr functions are implicitly host-device functions that can be called by HIP device code, the implementation of certain C++11 standard library features involves using non-constexpr functions or static members, making them unavailable for HIP device code (e.g., std::function). Therefore, C++11 standard library features are not officially supported by HIP for device code and are in a state of "work as-is."

differs from the C++ model used on the host side. For example, it's not necessary or
possible to start a new thread on the device.

Certain features have restrictions and clarifications. For example, any functions using
the ``constexpr`` qualifier or the new ``initializer lists``, ``std::move`` or
``std::forward`` features are implicitly considered to have the ``__host__`` and
``__device__`` execution space specifier. Also, ``constexpr`` variables that are static
members or namespace scoped can be used from both host and device, but only for read
access. Dereferencing a static ``constexpr`` outside its specified execution space causes
an error.

Lambdas are supported, but there are some extensions and restrictions on their usage. For
more information, see the `Extended lambdas`_ section below.

C++14 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> The C++14 language features are supported, except for the updates to the memory model.

Reviewer 6: remove 'except for the updates to the memory model'

All C++20 language features are supported, but extensions and restrictions apply. C++20
introduced coroutines and modules, which fundamentally changed how programs are written.
HIP doesn't support these features. However, ``consteval`` functions can be called from
host and device, even if specified for host use only.

The three-way comparison operator (spaceship operator ``<=>``) works with host and device
code.

.. _language_restrictions:
Extensions and restrictions
===============================================================================

In addition to the deviations from the standard, there are some general extensions and
restrictions to consider.

Global functions
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Functions that serve as an entry point for device execution are called kernels and are
specified with the ``__global__`` qualifier. To call a kernel function, use the triple
chevron operator: ``<<< >>>``. Kernel functions must have a ``void`` return type. These
functions can't:

* have a ``constexpr`` specifier
* have a parameter of type ``std::initializer_list`` or ``va_list``
* use an rvalue reference as a parameter.

> 

Reviewer 6: Add

'* use parameters having different sizes in host and device code, e.g. long double arguments, or structs containing long double members.
'* use struct-type arguments which have different layout in host and device code.'

Kernels can have variadic template parameters, but only one parameter pack, which must be
the last item in the template parameter list.

Device space memory specifiers
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HIP includes device space memory specifiers to indicate whether a variable is allocated
in host or device memory and how its memory should be allocated. HIP supports the
``__device__``, ``__shared__``, ``__managed__``, and ``__constant__`` specifiers.

> The ``__device__`` and ``__constant__`` specifiers define static variables, which are

Reviewer 6: static -> global

allocated within global memory on the HIP devices. The only difference is that
``__constant__`` variables can't be changed after allocation. The ``__shared__``
specifier allocates the variable within shared memory, which is available for all threads
in a block.

The ``__managed__`` variable specifier creates global variables that are initially
undefined and unaddressed within the global symbol table. The HIP runtime allocates
managed memory and defines the symbol when it loads the device binary. A managed variable

> can be accessed in both device and host code. To register managed variables, use

Reviewer 6: remove ' To register managed variables, use
``__hipRegisterManagedVariable`` in an initialization function.'

``__hipRegisterManagedVariable`` in an initialization function.

It's important to know where a variable is stored because it is only available from
certain locations. Generally, variables allocated in the host memory are not accessible

> from the device code, while variables allocated in the device memory are not accessible

Reviewer 6: insert 'directly' between 'not accessible'.

Add 'Accessing device variables in host code should be done through kernel execution or HIP API's like hipMemCpyToSymbol.'

from the host code. Dereferencing a pointer to device memory on the host results in a
segmentation fault.

Exception handling
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An important difference between the host and device code is exception handling. In device
code, this control flow isn't available due to the hardware architecture. The device
code must use return codes to handle errors.

Kernel parameters
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are some restrictions on kernel function parameters. They cannot be passed by
reference, because these functions are called from the host but run on the device. Also,
a variable number of arguments is not allowed.

Classes
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Classes work on both the host and device side, but there are some constraints. The static

> data members need to be ``const`` qualified, and ``static`` member functions can't be

Reviewer 6: remove 'The static
data members need to be ``const`` qualified'

``__global__``. ``Virtual`` member functions work, but a ``virtual`` function must not be
called from the host if the parent object was created on the device, or the other way
around, because this behavior is undefined. This also means you can't pass an object with

> ``virtual`` functions as a parameter to a kernel.

Reviewer 6: remove ' This also means you can't pass an object with
``virtual`` functions as a parameter to a kernel.'

Polymorphic function wrappers
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HIP doesn't support the polymorphic function wrapper ``std::function``, which was
introduced in C++11.

Extended lambdas
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HIP supports Lambdas, which by default work as expected.

> Lambdas inherit the execution space specification from the surrounding context. For

Reviewer 6: A lambda has implicit host device attributes, therefore can be executed by both device and host code. A lambda defined in a host function can be passed to a template kernel as a template argument and called in the kernel. A lambda can access host variables by copy but not by reference. Accessing host variables by reference in device code results in compilation error or undefined behavior.

example, in a device, the lambda can only be called from other device functions. This
also means that lambdas can't be used as a template argument for kernels unless defined
in a device function or a kernel.

> To help develop versatile software, HIP supports an extension that makes lambdas even

Reviewer 6: remove this paragraph and add

'To make a lamba callable only by host or device code, users can add `__host__` or `__device__` attribute.'

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter describes the C++ support of the HIP ecosystem
  ROCm software.
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, C++

*******************************************************************************
C++ language support
*******************************************************************************

.. _language_introduction:

> Introduction

Reviewer 3: remove this header - not required

===============================================================================

> The ROCm platform enables the power of combined C++ and HIP code. This code is compiled

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ROCm platform enables the power of combined C++ and HIP (Heterogeneous-computing Interface for Portability) code. This code is compiled
```

with a ``clang`` or ``clang++`` compiler. The official compilers support the HIP
platform, but for the most up-to-date feature set, use the ``amdclang`` or ``amdclang++``
components included in the ROCm installation.

The source code is compiled according to the ``C++03``, ``C++11``, ``C++14``, ``C++17``,
and ``C++20`` standards, along with HIP-specific extensions, but is subject to

> restrictions. The key restriction is the lack of standard library support. This is due to
> the Single Instruction/Multiple Data (SIMD) nature of the HIP device, which makes most of
> the standard library implementations not performant or useful. However, essential

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
restrictions. The key restriction is the lack of standard library support. This is due to the HIP device's Single Instruction/Multiple Data (SIMD) nature, which makes most of
the standard library implementations not performant or useful. However, essential
```

operations are implemented in HIP-specific libraries such as `rocPRIM
<https://github.com/ROCm/rocprim>`_, `rocThrust <https://github.com/ROCm/rocthrust/>`_,
and `hipCUB <https://github.com/ROCm/hipcub/>`_.

.. _language_modern_c++_support:
Modern C++ support
===============================================================================

C++ is considered a modern programming language as of C++11. This section describes how
HIP supports these new C++ features.

C++11 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The C++11 standard introduced many new features. These features are supported in HIP
device code, with some notable omissions. The most significant is the lack of concurrency
support on the device. This is because the HIP device concurrency model fundamentally

> differs from the C++ model used on the host side. For example, it is not necessary or
> possible to start a new thread on the device.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
differs from the C++ model used on the host side. For example, it's not necessary or
possible to start a new thread on the device.
```

Certain features have restrictions and clarifications. For example, any functions using
the ``constexpr`` qualifier or the new ``initializer lists``, ``std::move`` or
``std::forward`` features are implicitly considered to have the ``__host__`` and

> ``__device__`` execution space specifier. Also, constexpr variables that are static

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``__device__`` execution space specifier. Also, ``constexpr`` variables that are static
```

Reviewer 2: This should solve the CI failure.

members or namespace scoped can be used from both host and device, but only for read
access. Dereferencing a static ``constexpr`` outside its specified execution space causes
an error.

Lambdas are supported, but there are some extensions and restrictions on their usage. For
more information, see the `Extended lambdas`_ section below.

C++14 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The C++14 language features are supported, except for the updates to the memory model.

C++17 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All C++17 language features are supported.

C++20 support
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All C++20 language features are supported, but extensions and restrictions apply. C++20

> introduced coroutines and modules, which fundamentally change how programs are written.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
introduced coroutines and modules, which fundamentally changed how programs are written.
```

HIP doesn't support these features. However, ``consteval`` functions can be called from
host and device, even if specified for host use only.

The three-way comparison operator (spaceship operator ``<=>``) works with host and device
code.

.. _language_restrictions:
Extensions and restrictions
===============================================================================

In addition to the deviations from the standard, there are some general extensions and
restrictions to consider.

Global functions
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Functions that serve as an entry point for device execution are called kernels and are
specified with the ``__global__`` qualifier. To call a kernel function, use the triple

> chevron operator: ``<<< >>>``. Kernel functions must have a void return type. These

Reviewer 4: have a ``void`` return type.

functions can't:

* have a ``constexpr`` specifier
* have a parameter of type ``std::initializer_list`` or ``va_list``
* use an rvalue reference as a parameter.

> Kernels can have variadic template parameters, but they can only have one parameter pack,
> which must be the last item in the template parameter list.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kernels can have variadic template parameters, but only one parameter pack,
which must be the last item in the template parameter list.
```

Device space memory specifiers
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HIP includes device space memory specifiers to indicate whether a variable is allocated
in host or device memory and how its memory should be allocated. HIP supports the

> ``__device__``, ``__shared__``, ``__managed__`` and ``__constant__`` specifiers.

Reviewer 4: add a comma after ``__managed__``

The ``__device__`` and ``__constant__`` specifiers define static variables, which are
allocated within global memory on the HIP devices. The only difference is that
``__constant__`` variables can't be changed after allocation. The ``__shared__``
specifier allocates the variable within shared memory, which is available for all threads
in a block.

> The ``__managed__`` variable specifier is used to create global variables that are
> initially undefined and unaddressed within the global symbol table. The HIP runtime
> allocates managed memory and defines the symbol when it loads the device binary. A
> managed variable can be accessed in both device and host code. To register managed
> variables, use ``__hipRegisterManagedVariable`` in an initialization function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ``__managed__`` variable specifier creates global variables that are
initially undefined and unaddressed within the global symbol table. The HIP runtime
allocates managed memory and defines the symbol when it loads the device binary. A
managed variable can be accessed in both device and host code. To register managed
variables, use ``__hipRegisterManagedVariable`` in an initialization function.
```

It's important to know where a variable is stored because it is only available from
certain locations. Generally, variables allocated in the host memory are not accessible
from the device code, while variables allocated in the device memory are not accessible
from the host code. Dereferencing a pointer to device memory on the host results in a
segmentation fault.

Exception handling
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An important difference between the host and device code is exception handling. In device

> code, this control flow is not available due to the hardware architecture. The device

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
code, this control flow is unavailable due to the hardware architecture. The device
```

reference, because these functions are called from the host but run on the device. Also,
a variable number of arguments is not allowed.

Classes
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Classes work on both the host and device side, but there are some constraints. The static
data members need to be ``const`` qualified, and ``static`` member functions can't be
``__global__``. ``Virtual`` member functions work, but a ``virtual`` function must not be
called from the host if the parent object was created on the device, or the other way
around, because this behavior is undefined. This also means you can't pass an object with
``virtual`` functions as a parameter to a kernel.

Polymorphic function wrappers
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HIP doesn't support the polymorphic function wrapper ``std::function``, which was
introduced in C++11.

Extended lambdas
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HIP supports Lambdas, which by default work as expected.

Lambdas inherit the execution space specification from the surrounding context. For

> example, in a device, the lambda can only be called from other device functions. This
> also means that lambdas can't be used as a template argument for kernels unless they are
> defined in a device function or a kernel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
example, in a device, the lambda can only be called from other device functions. This
also means that lambdas can't be used as a template argument for kernels unless
defined in a device function or a kernel.
```
